---
layout: chapter
novel: Violet
chapter: 13
title: "Narobi"
permalink: /fiction/violet/chapter-13/
act: 2
date: November 02, 2025
---
Approached from the south, Nairobi’s binary nature is unmistakable. From far across the Serengeti, blurred by heat mirage and umbrella thorn, it sits defiant, neither against nature nor of it. A spire and a sphere, one and zero, shimmering silver and white in the high noon-sky sun. 

This impressionistic blur resolved into detail as Illapa’s gliding southbound train approached. The globe of the half-kilometer high Nyanja Arcology was striated with horizontal not-quite-ridges, as though it had all once been liquid and as a last drop added from high above, rippling through its entirety, flash solidified. Matte egg-shell in color when close, nacreous from afar, a result of the fractaline reduction and reproduction of the ripples and ridges, down to fingerprint-fine etching; thus the Nyanja bore the nickname ‘The Pearl’. With all things arcology there was a ruthless practicality in the beauty: the minute arches, loops, and whorls refracted all electromagnetic spectra, not just the visible, making it a perplexing target for guidance systems and radar. Better try to get signal lock on a wisp of cloud or single wildebeest among a million-head herd. 

Where the Pearl was all but empty, a hedge against the future repeating the past, Nairobi teemed with the now and those who lived for it. Not a single spire but a well-over kilometer-high quiver-full of them, ringed by a tight city wall and all mounted several stories above what had once been savannah. This sub-level call the *laibon*, neither natural nor civilized, was an intercessor between the earth itself and the star-reaching city above. Bathed in sunlight piped from Nairobi’s top by optic pipes, here hybrids with war-relic ancestors and of other less obvious origins had created a home; a city under the city, wildly organized.

To get to Uplift, which derived its name from the process that made the first hybrids, one must merely follow the name as also an imperative instruction. Go up through the levels of the city. All trains, long as they are, must spiral into the city, arriving first in city-lower, the base of Nairobi proper. A jungle and vine choked street-level, it is here that hybrids and humans most overlap, perhaps more than anywhere on the planet. Despite the deep shadows cast by the vast buildings above, out her windows Illapa could see the blaring glow of neon, dancing displays of LED, and ultraviolet black lights that lined every block fed the greenery here; a literal urban jungle. Illapa had memories, so many memories there, happy and brutal.

As the train spiraled towards the station, it rose. Out of the crepuscular cacophony of city-lower and into city-mid. Like a body, it was where one finds most of the vital life functions. Not so exciting as the lower bits nor as abstract as the upper, there must be a place where the work of existence is done and city-mid is it. Practical and purposeful, it was not without its charms. The simple pleasures, the benign hedonisms of gustatory delight, dissolving massage, or sensory deprivation, could be found alongside the doing of what must be done to persist. True, at times there is a bit of bloat and a rumble of indigestion, but as she stepped onto the station platform, it was as though she had pressed the ear to city-mid and could hear the city’s beating heart, the flexing diaphragm, the rumbling stomach. The music of homeostasis.

But her mission was Uplift. She was headed to the pinnacle, top of city-upper. Second only to Kili’s Uhuro peak, Nairobi’s summit was sun soaked, sparkling as that nourishing star made its long arc from day-break to dusk. An architect’s playground, city-upper was as distant from nature as its foundation was enmeshed with it. Plant-life, ever present in Nairobi, was here relegated to seams and troughs, only emerging as stylistic flourishes and finishing touches. 

And while nature’s presence was thus diminished, its laws were outright defied. No better example than that of the Tanganyika Gathering Hall, a massive complex of egg-shaped structures designed to host the world. Each egg was substantial on its own, filled with event halls, auditoriums, hotels and all that could be needed to sustain an influx of tens of thousands for whatever it was that brought them there. 

Yet the eggs themselves were suspended in a diaphanous nest of glistening graphene-silk. Billions of strands woven among the spires of the other sky scrapers, continually renewed by millions of hybrid spiders bred for this sole purpose. Neither opaque nor transparent, the nest was like an prismatic hourglass turned horizontal and rotated into a toroid. As architecture, it was both direct statement and metaphor. As statement, that the Rift Valley was the epicenter of pre-eminent engineering. As metaphor, you have entrusted yourselves to our care. Global politics, while broadly peaceful, was hardly bucolic, every moment inside a gathering of nations a high wire walk. It only worked if all maintained the balance, each thread working together to hold the fragile, crystalline calm from crashing to earth. And in the center of the Gathering Hall, in the greatest egg piled on top of the others, was the Tanganyika Grand Auditorium, the Room from which the World was Ruled, so it was said. The United Nations held council here, the Economic, Gestation, and Genetic Forum met here, and now Uplift.