---
layout: chapter
novel: Violet
chapter: 15
title: "Hexagrams"
permalink: /fiction/violet/chapter-15/
act: 2
date: February 15, 2026
---
Plumes of incense ribboned upwards, filling the temple at the Summer Palace with a thick haze. Yi In-yeong, the Viceroy of Koryo to the Continuum, kneeled before a jade bodhisattva. Dark and quiet, the interior of the temple was lit by rows of candles, their smoke mingling with the unctuous veil. The vapors of a third source, a set of leaves bathed in a shallow bronze basin of water boiling above a small fire, joined them. In-yeong drew a deep breath and held it, feeling herself expand. She was draped in a yellow silk prayer robe, her hair loose, hands on her lap, eyes fixed on the bundle of yarrow sticks, a profound decision before her.

Elsewhere in the palace, the small council was debating the matter of her abdication. For viziers and mandarins, many of whom were royal Progeny and Wards themselves, the decision was both one of tradition and a measure of the grim political realities the nation faced. Good wu-wei demanded her absence. In the vacuum of her presence, theories and suppositions would peek their heads out, opinions, no longer of wary of immediate annihilation, would emerge, and true selves would strut about to hash out the harsh exigencies of governance. Fear, arrogance, earnest concern, unscrupulous conniving, and as many motivations as there are emotions and councilors would jostle for supremacy. A miserable, exhausting experience for all involved. Which is why she was not. Han Fei himself could not find fault in her method. Be brutal to your advisors, he admonished, give nothing away.

If not today, soon a decision would be reached. No matter how robust and contentious the conversation, the answer was predetermined. Tradition, honor, auspicious timings and celestial aligning all *suggested *that which was expected, if not demanded. In this, her seventh year, she would abdicate voluntarily. Since the first Selection, where from among the generation of war born New Joseons they chose one of their own to be their leader, an elected royal, no Viceroy had left willingly at any other time. Announce in the seventh year, acquiesce in the eighth. Earlier or later was always forced, always shameful.

She drew another deep breath, pulling the air to her belly, to her hips, to her toes, and held it. Waves buffeted her ego, dissolving it at the edges. Up, she felt her minds eye float up, up out the top of her head, towards the sky. Through the roof and she was looking down, the world unfurled yet a globe, yet a map, yet the blue orb of a planet. She was above Koryo, that peninsula off the Asian mainland, belonging once to both the Zhongguo and Japanese Empires. Now it sat at the top of the crescent of the Continuum, an archipelagic sweep of nations at the edge of the Great Ocean. To the west, the Indian subcontinent with the Rajput Alliance holding the center, flanked by the Bengals and Persians, with the Keralans below and the Himalayas above, battlements agains the Siberian wilds.

The wilds.

Ruined earth, soon to be one hundred years of neither nature nor nation, but biological furies and apocalypse in one, stretching from Mongolia across the Siberian taiga. Encountering the Urals, the wilds cut down between the Black and Caspian seas through Baghdad and the Levant to the tip of Arabia before leaping to Africa. There they carve a brutal X across it, leaving only the Songhai, Moors, Nubians, and Ngunis isolated at their respective cardinal points. The whole of Southern Europe, anywhere below the olive oil line, is in that paradoxical state of being uninhabitable due to its over-abundance of inhabitants. Wilds not only afflict the old world, but also the New. Cross the Atlantic to the continents of the Golden East; Turtle Island and it’s southern cousins Cēmānāhuac and Tawantinsuyo; once all under the Inka’s vast empire, which ran from the Yukon to Patagonia, now shredded and splintered. All now tiger-stripped with stretches of demonic tundra, monstrous prairie, and voracious jungle. Leap from the Andes across the Great Ocean and there in its southern half a whole island of nothing but arcologies and angry, unnatural life. Thus was the reality encompassing the Continuum and Koryo; an enraged, disfigured planet pockmarked with desperate civilizations and blighted with inordinate nature.

With the ship of the nation foundering and the fleet in which she found herself threatening to disperse, How much longer should she steer them through these dangerous and deadly waters? To leave now would add instability when they were at their very weakest.

Only the deluded could maintain a belief that anything resembling control existed in such a universe as this. Variables, confounding factors, and the sheer randomness of life compounded into a chaotic melange of causes and influences, no one extricable from the others, no prime mover or major force, just emergent events from unpredictable noise. To plan was madness. The Joseons had learned as much at mid-war, conquered and crumbling, their dynasty left to a lone dowager. Alone, she turned to the universe, asking it for guidance with a shaking of yarrow sticks. The hexagrams cannot command, only insinuate. A close listener, though, this Yi dowager Queen. She heard; she understood. 

Wait, suggested the universe, for your moment. 

It came when the Manchurian Confederacy shattered, allowing the Joseon Dynasty to once again reassert power and take the reins and reign of the Koryo peninsula. With a dwindling population and deep disillusionment of the populous, maintaining royalty ‘by birth’ would no longer be tolerated, so an innovation was required. Again the *Yi Ching *was consulted. The dowager’s daughter, the new Joseon Queen, Her Grace Yi Min-Seo, had the odd fortune to be infertile. Having taken the throne by force, she was under no obligation by tradition to submit to any outdated notion of primogeniture requiring a king or even a male sovereign of any kind. Sensing the wind shift – and under the divined influence of her elder mother – she opted for a different policy: the best and brightest children of Koryo would become its royals, with the Choosing happening as early as strong signs of excellence emerged. As genetic pre-conception crafting improved, many children were selected as soon as they were fertilized. These became Progeny, that is, Princes and Princesses. Wards were those found later, undergoing an exhaustive tutelage process, pushed to the limits of what their genes said they were capable. They had obligations to prove the original proposal right: that rule by the best meant the best kind of rule.

Whether those obligations had been met, perhaps not even a century was enough time to decide. But the Joseon Dynasty persisted, the rare *anything *to have seen both sides of the Long War as well as the full stretch of its Shadow. Yi In-yeong, within hours of the announcement that she had been Selected, was taken to the Temple of the Grand Palace and there shown by her predecessors, all six then living Viceroys, how to ask for guidance on their greatest decisions. Each had her own theory, and In-yeong found herself believing that she already *knew *all that was needed, but the ritual and the incense brought solace, the meditation of it brought focus, the shaking and interpreting brought clarity. The hexagrams did not command or suggest, they confirmed, a sign that she and the universe were in agreement.

Returning to herself and the present moment, she lifted the bundle of yarrow sticks to the statue, her head bowed. She sought the question. The fates must be asked in order to answer. Temptation to ask for prophesy, for future sense, almost overwhelmed. Her position now, so precarious. Inheriting not only power, but debt and decay, the push into the wilds no base strategy but a gambit, a desperate play. Yet that fear of the future’s abyss is twinned by the inevitable known, destiny unchangeable. No, In-yeong never wished to know what *would *happen. Rulers were not swept up in the currents of time, but trimmed sail and leaned hard at the helm, following the sharp needle of their heart’s compass. She too consulted the heavens and for the same purpose, not to ask an opinion but to gauge the course. 	Direction decided she rose, still kneeling, but now straight-backed and eyes open. With a steady, increasing rhythm she shook the sticks, short sharp jostles to loosen the yin and yang. There was a feeling to it. She could sense the shift in her hands as something came free. Two sticks had emerged.

Oh.

How strange.

For the first time, she and the universe had opposing opinions.