---
layout: chapter
novel: Violet
chapter: 49
title: "The Asura"
permalink: /fiction/violet/chapter-49/
act: 5
date: November 02, 2025
---
Soon her old Sensei would be dead. The thought did not lighten Hideyo’s step, it was not a gleeful vengeance. As she walked through the empty expanse of the Grand Royal Palace grounds, the memory of her last attempt surfaced, like a corpse washing ashore. Yet something nagged: it hadn’t been an *attempt*. The fight, the explosion, the fall. Hideyo had been left on the burning pavement, bloodied and bereft of an arm, the white finger of her splintered collar bone sticking out from the blackened raw meat where her shoulder had been. But the Sifu, her Sifu then, had been damaged far worse still, what would have been left of her body fell a distance that was unsurvivable. It had cost her an arm, but Hideyo *had *killed her old Sifu, the violet-eyed asura. Not with all the agar in the world should have been enough to resurrect her. Yet the Zaqqum—no matter how mad they were—did not lie and was not mistaken. Her Sifu had returned, a revenant. An error in the universe she had the rare privilege to set right. A busaw is not an elegant weapon, but it is an annihilating one. 

The night was late, or the morning early, and, by Okafor’s calculations, what had once been Moon would be just beginning its duties. The carnage would be regrettable, but necessary. No sane person could look at what was about to occur in the Residence and see it as the behavior of a single woman, no matter how strange she was. The point, however, was spectacle and horror. Any crime within the comprehension of the law was insufficient. The monstrousness of the violence must overwhelm, such that the death of the old asura would be justice, the absence of the Child a gift, and the decision to enthrone Ji-woo anything but a question.

But this, unlike so much else, was not to be left to chance. Her night had been busy. Priming a visiting population of thousands to believe events transpired as Ji-woo would articulate required small but surgical influence. His installment had been a more subtle affair, nurtured over months. This night, in a span of hours, she had, in her uniquely compelling way, briefly visited several key members of the council and visiting dignitaries. Hardly more than a hypnopompic hallucination, she explained how they would now remember yesterday’s events. How the Sifu had brashly threatened anyone who stood in her way, almost rabid, lupine. How the Ward had seemed to cower, manipulated by the foreigner that had dragged her into the Wilds at time of crisis. How despite the Vizier’s hysterics, the guard’s insubordination, and the general mobbishness of the council, Ji-woo had been a mountain amid the maelstrom, steady and immovable. Her efforts with her somnolent targets were to alter the emotions of their memories, not the facts.

Okafor had given her that key. Skeptical of the plan, the scientist had not, as Hideyo had expected, gone off to sulk, but instead became doubly-invested. At her suggestion the asura had gone about planting of mental seeds so that when the Child was found missing the next day it would be assumed she fled. To be among the echelons of power, Okafor explained, is to be forever looking for that which is not said, the subtle gesture behind the overt. No faster way to trap political animals than to make them feel as though they had missed the deeper story. The mixture, she had explained, was key. Only one, maybe two, in true power, elites, top councilors of respect. Make sure this one is no obvious Ji-woo ally. They’ll be reticent, not willing to take the first stand. For that, you need midlevel and junior power-brokers, from both within Koryo and among visiting delegations. That is the trick of it. The younger are bolder, more willing to buck the trend. Just as they are about to begin mocking the brash, misguided youth, an elder will agree. Now the entire ladder of power will tremble—did *I *miss what that neophyte caught? That will be enough. They need not believe, only doubt. Make the mental barrier a membrane, so thin that the welter of violence and gore would more than push the skeptical mind through.

Two mercenaries guarding an entrance to the royal residences stiffened as she approached. Holding the talisman up for their inspection, as though they were not commanded by the one she controlled. Puppets of her puppet, unaware that she was puppeteer. Yet for their guns and armor, her small piece of carved wood was enough for them to not only pass but to bow, reverent, as she did. One of the strangest aspects of power was its non-existence, like civilization or art, outside of a shared hallucination. She knew the metaphor was childish. Might was real. The busaw’s claws as real as the bellies of those it disemboweled. 

Just inside, a blade of moonlight fell across the hallway. She held up her pale palm, as though expecting the moonbeams to pool silver there, then passed the rest of her arm through, as though applying ablutions, regarding it, the subtle gloss of the white carapace reflecting soft flashes of moonlight. The Lucky Child, Ward Yi Hyeon Bong-cha, would, like the others, bend to her will. No coin toss to save her this time. The Child would succumb to thrall, as they all did.

Hideyo had discovered the ability shortly after waking. The military facility where she had been made an asura was lightly staffed. What they were doing was well after the war, hugely experimental and, if leaked, could cause no end of pain for the Japanese. Their position in the Continuum would be compromised. That is, of course, unless the discovery happened *after *Hirohito had proved her usefulness. 

Some nurse had come, bringing food, and she was furious. Why, now, she couldn’t even remember. The object of the fury wasn’t relevant, but the emotion. She was all but inert, hardly able to move, and the man cowered as if she were towering over him, berating him. Her surprise stunted the anger and, soon too, the man stood, a sense of embarrassment, as though wincing from ghosts. He checked her bandages, vitals, and left. For two days, as she healed, she experimented. A simple man, he drew towards her with lust, contracted in shame, trembled in fear, and seethed with anger all at her whim. Not a finger had moved, no glance shared, her eyes all but closed. 

The military had a battery of tests planned. To see what their experiment had wrought. As soon as she played weak, buying herself just enough time to master the subtler nudges needed. She had then connived and killed her way out of the facility. She would not be the Continuum’s errand girl. There were greater powers to which she could ally herself, where she would decide her future and how to apply her brand of violence. So she left, and found Li Xing and Okafor. Their little corporation was about to become a global empire. They needed someone for the wetwork. Hideyo was obliged.

In the intervening decades she had charted a path here, to the Lucky Child’s door. The Society’s plans. Violet’s ascent. Now she stood here.

The door to the Ward’s room opened soundlessly. She had ordered Ji-woo to have maintenance confirm this hall, and the one where the Sifu would stay, would have no squeaking hinges as alarms. Though dark, she saw at once the room was hardly disturbed. The girl’s items were there, but, from their neatness, seemingly dropped and forgotten, she must left almost as soon as she had arrived. Where was she. *Where was she*. For an instant, Hideyo feared—the busaw—what if she was with the Sifu? They had been inseparable, her lone ally all this—no, she would not consider it. The Lucky Child would not perish in such an absurd and abysmal way. If she had, if she did, she wasn’t who she claimed to be. The grounds were massive, she had dozens of associates… but none close enough. Even the old Vizier was only a partial ally. Whom else but the Sifu?

Hideyo searched the room. Carefully looking under the bed, in the shower, in the closets. The kitchens were closed, no where to go. It had been mere hours, where would she have gone? Did she suspect? Ji-woo had been confident, yes, but only enough to rattle. Though the child was smart, she was loyal. Even if she saw the trap, she would not leave him to victory. Where *was *she. Contingencies would need to be exercised. The cuckoo prepared for actual battle. Power over this little place was beginning to prove more effortful than anticipated.