---
layout: chapter
novel: Violet
chapter: 50
title: "Ghul"
permalink: /fiction/violet/chapter-50/
act: 5
date: October 18, 2026
---
At thirteen, Msizi had been ordained as an apostle-in-training for the Cult of the Outer World. The name had started out a pejorative, mocking those desperate or deluded enough to even conceive of leaving the walls of the Onzulu. Given the Cult was established while the world-spanning war outside still raged—the nascent Long War not yet having earned the epithet—one could see how the desire to leave the City In the Mountain could seem deranged. On the day of her ordination, an exact round century had passed since the foundation of the ‘Cult.’ In the intervening years, the Cult had earned itself one of the six executive seats of the Onzulu. Only cult members could leave the arcology. Which worked out well, because they were often the only ones who ever *wanted *to.

And Msizi had wanted to, so very badly. While life within the Onzulu was anything but orderly, she felt the grand ballet of life was danced in chains. Walls of stone and steel made her feel safe, yes, but also smothered. Her curiosity was not limited to what was out there, the vault of the sky with clouds on the breeze, the setting sun on the far horizon blazing across the savannah, the churn of the waves above depth of the oceans, but also *who*. A world filled with not just people, but *peoples*. Whole civilizations at odds with one another. How could it be that millions upon millions agreed with one another, comprising a single nation, and yet there could be dozens of other nations, each of its own millions, that disagreed so vehemently with one another. The problem fascinated her. So she studied, for a decade, the Outer Arts, the curation of self to survive the world beyond the Onzulu walls. Then finally, upon graduation, she was sent as attaché along with a veteran rep. With a clean thirty journeys to her name assisting, she was ready to solo. Her first was a gentle one. No grand stakes, no complex politics, no real dangers. Just attend the party of the Koryo enthronement. Show that the Onzulu was still necessary to the Continuum and a friend. If possible, gather insights into the other attendee nations. Information was rarely useless, even if it only served to buttress what was known. Show up, be nice, pay attention, enjoy the festivities. What could go wrong?

She cursed her mentor for that hexing question as she shivered against the metal door of the walk-in fridge. The Inkan ‘ambassador’ lay in her feverish stupor, huddled among the blankets. Two full days and nights had passed. No one was coming. They—she, Illapa, Eshma—had been abandoned, or perhaps sacrificed, to the ghoulish thing on the other side of the door. Of what there was to be thankful for, the first was that Illapa had not succumbed to fever for a handful of hours. Not a lot, but each a gift. Eshma, to both of their amazement, had been the first to name the thing. Preta, she called it, a ‘hungry ghost.’ When it was noted that it was more corporeal than most ghosts she huffed in frustration and began to raise her voice. Here, the Inkan’s ability to encourage quiet through being more terrifying than what was beyond the door proved quite effective. Eshma relented—ghūl then, she offered, a graveyard feaster. An angry jinn, warped and twisted, consumed by a need to eat. Msizi had begun to roll her eyes when Illapa’s serious nods of agreement gave her pause. There had been rumors of such things from the war, and even a few still used in the Revolutions after.

Watch was established, just as the fever hit. No one was deluded as to the cause. The thing had polluted Illapa’s hand as much as it had damaged it. In the back bend of the fridge, they built as much of a nest as they could. Eshma was a poor partner in a crisis—she seemed forever on the verge of tears—but she understood how to make anything comfortable. For a full hour, while mopping sweat from Illapa’s brow and half smothering her when the nightmares came to keep the shouts quiet, she had studied the shelves. Disassociation would have been the easy guess. But no, as they switched, Eshma shared her brief strategy, then executed. Within minutes, condiment containers had been emptied into the space between the shrink-wrapped veat steaks in their tub. What, Msizi had begun to ask, would we need large empty, sealable buckets for in here—ah, yes. Biology is unrelenting, even in crisis.

For two nights and two days, they had slept, watched, and, best they could, attempted to soothe the agent as she fought whatever minor plague the ghul had wrought upon her. Her final lucid guidance was to watch it. Don’t poke your head up, she said, drawing her hand over her nose and mouth as if peering over a fence. Lean from the side. Your forehead is a bigger target than your cheek. Watch that thing. Take notes. Despite the Cult’s aggressive training process, counter espionage was not in the Representative’s curriculum. That was reserved for the other, more terrifying members. Illapa would have liked them too.

And so Msizi and Eshma had watched. They jotted notes on the back of the clipboard of inventory sheets hung near the door and debriefed one another when switching shifts. Sleep came in two hour snatches, neither willing to leave the Inkan to her thrashing or the ghul unobserved for too long.

Their first observation, before Illapa had lost reason and consciousness, was that something else had called the ghul away. A distraction that had taken it from the kitchen. There were crashes and shouts. Others had survived. Whether they survived still, was unknown, but seemed unlikely. Then the bodies came. The ghul, one by one, dragged corpses into the kitchen. It seemed to be running on pure instinct, like watching an ant cut a leaf or a spider spin a web. Whatever humanity had been, this vile automaton was now bereft of it. 

After a grim pile had mounted—five, she guessed, but was too horrified to truly count—its demeanor changed entirely. It stood erect again, eyes alert, hunting. Even in these few hours it had become more ruined. Most teeth were missing. The skin had hardened like the callouses on a heel. The seeping open wounds had largely scabbed. What extraneous fat there had been was gone, the creature now gaunt and cadaverish. Not only did the hip and collarbones protrude, but even the twin bones of the forearm could be discerned. Rent cheeks exposed the few remaining teeth back to the molars, an ear to ear rictus in an abandoned graveyard of a smile. But it was not dead. 

With methodic intention, it began to search the kitchen. Its movements were alien, like those of a sleepwalker, an uncanny mix of dexterity and confusion. Drawers were opened and closed, pots removed, various implements inspected and discarded. A large cleaver and roasting trays were set on the center stainless steel prep counter. Two huge stock pots, each nearly the size of its torso, were filled with water and set over the burners to boil. A corpse was selected and dragged onto the counter. Savage, clumsy blows struck the shoulder until the arm detached. It was set aside. Butchery ensued. Each body was dismembered, pieces sorted into macabre piles of arms, hands, legs, feet, torso and heads. Thighs were placed on the roasting trays and into the waiting hot oven. Heads, hands, and feet into the huge stockpots, now at rolling boils, billowing steam.

Exhausted by its efforts, the thing lay flat on its back. Its lidless eyes rolled back in their sockets. Msizi had expected the breathing to slow, but instead, it accelerated. The pale blue-gray skin became ruddy. Wounds began to seep. This state of furious rest lasted no more than ten, perhaps fifteen minutes. As suddenly as it began, it ended. The rapid breathing stopped, it sat up, and looked around. In that brief lacuna, Eshma had taken over and had barely rolled away from the window in time. She slid down the door and pressed herself flat against it, both bracing and staying out of line of sight. Foot steps of clicking bone on steel approached. A blast of steam fogged the window. But the glance was cursory. Just as quickly, the footsteps receded, back towards the stoves.

Eshma cursed her cowardice and her miserable situation, but eventually stood and again watched through the window.

The creature had gone. On the stove, the pots still boiled. The ghastly mise en place remained. Within minutes, it returned, dragging a fresh corpse. Now the thing turned to its demonic cookery. The oven was opened and, bare-handed, it removed the trays—the searing was audible. It set the tray on the counter. Fear over came her again. Eshma only listened: the clinking, warping sound of cooling metal; the fizz-popping of water trapped beneath; and the sound of eating. Ravenous tearing, greasy lip smacking, and great gulping swallows filled her ears like screams. She did not need to look. The gorging seemed to go on for an eternity.

When, finally, the sounds slowed, she dared to again observe. It was pulling the last strings of meat from a femur. Thus denuded, it dropped the bone into one of the great steaming pots. The ghul’s belly was now distended, the tray empty. Sated, it slumped to the floor. Once again it slid into its peculiar brand of panicked sleep. Eshma caught herself looking at the Inka, whose breaths were just as rapid, her sleep just as fitful. No… no I will not consider that. Not yet, she told herself.

Nearly an hour passed, she guessed, before it stirred again. Time, for Eshma, was a thing managed by others—clocks, her assistants, those who rushed to their meetings with her. Her duty was to hold court, to see that the time was well spent and well managed. When she had earned her official watch as a junior bureaucrat, she had been so proud. But nothing could eclipse when reached the status of not needing it. The many bangles and bracelets encircling her wrist where a watch once sat were, to her, as marvelous as a crown upon her brow. Yet, in that moment, she missed it. How long the vile thing lay digesting she could only guess.

As Msizi approached to relieve her, Eshma gestured to the window. Together, they peered through the small square of plexiglass. Eshma, in a shaking whisper, explained what she had seen. Within moments, the ghulish thing sat up. It seemed in a daze, nothing like the prior alertness. Lethargic and stiff, it pushed itself standing. The once ballooned gut was now a mere paunch. Worse, it was no longer skeletal. For a set of breaths, it stood, braced against the steel counter, as if to gather itself. Msizi could see its cheeks, once gaunt, were now full. Once visible hips and ribs were no more. It wandered to a corner and evacuated. Hot, steaming black ichor spattered against the ground and walls. Both women fought a retch.

For two days now, the cycle had continued. Together, the women had counted the cadence of its ghastly circadian. A few hours, they had estimated, as short as three, as long as five, for each bleak cycle. With every waking, it appeared stronger and, somehow, more horrific. Protrusions and calluses had started to become spurs and plates of bone. Corpsish musculature grew, like a leper engaged in body building. New teeth jagged teeth jutted from its jaw. Where it had once desperately huffed at the window, now, it would, at random, approach the fridge door, and scrape at the handle. When a talon did hook, the can of beans would creak in inanimate protest.

Illapa’s fever had stabilized and it seemed the worst had passed. Msizi no longer feared she would die. There was food enough, but the damp cold had suffused into their bones. Warmth was a losing battle. As its strength grew, their safety wained. There was no waiting out this thing, no rescue coming. Escape would be their only option.

Wake up soon, Msizi said, wiping the fevered brow of the Inkan, we need you.